Everybody has some issues with procrastination, because if you're working on something, it means you're not working on a lot of other things. But some people have more issues with procrastination than others. In this video, we're going to give you a little insight into procrastination, why it arises, and a powerful little tool to help you address it. When you look at something that you'd really rather not do, it seems that you activate the areas of your brain associated with pain. Your brain, naturally enough, looks for a way to stop that negative stimulation by switching your attention to something else. But here's the trick. Researchers discovered that not long after people might start actually working on what they didn't like, that neural discomfort disappeared. So it seems what happens when you procrastinate is something like this. First, you observe and get a cue about something that causes a tiny bit of unease. You don't like it. So to make the sensation go away, you turn your attention from whatever caused that unease. You turn toward something more pleasant. The result? You feel happier. Temporarily. We're going to talk more about procrastination later on, but in the meantime, I'm going to let you in on a handy little mental tool. This tool is called the Pomodoro. It was invented by Francesco Cirillo in the early 1980s. Pomodoro is Italian for tomato. The timer you use often looks like a tomato, but really, a timer is all there is to this elegant little technique. All you need to do is set a timer to 25 minutes, turn off all interruptions, and then focus. That's it. Most anybody can focus for 25 minutes. You may be surprised to learn that the most important thing is what you do after you finish those 25 minutes of focus. At that point, take from 2 to 5 minutes to retrieve what you've just learned. That means you recall the most important ideas or concepts you've just learned by pulling the ideas, as much as you can, from your own mind. Only peek at what you've been studying if you have to. This type of retrieval practice strengthens the memory traces, making them much easier to find later. After you've retrieved the most important parts of what you've just learned, give yourself another 2 or 3 minutes of what neuroscientists call restful wakefulness. During this time, above all else, do not pick up your phone. That jolts you instantly back into the focused mode. Focused mode, after all, is when you're focusing on something outside your body. Instead, during those last few minutes of your pomodoro, just rest quietly or do something simple and undemanding, like making a cup of tea or watching your hamster take a nap. What's happening here is that you're giving your brain the chance to move even more into the diffuse mode, that more relaxed style of thinking that helps your mind knit together new connections. In the first part, after your 25 minutes of external focus, when you're actively retrieving what you learned, you're using one part of your diffuse mode system to reinforce learning. Then, when you rest quietly, you're using another part of your diffuse mode system. You're not conscious of it, but during this quiet rest period, you're letting your brain spontaneously replay patterns from what you just studied. Neuroscientists have found that these short moments of awake rest help lock in your new learning, shifting it from fragile to lasting memory. So think of the pomodoro as a period of intense 25-minute period of focus followed by a built-in two-part recovery phase. Focus, retrieve, then rest, and you'll find your brain learning more deeply with less frustration. Give it a try. Next, we're going to see how one very shy 10-year-old changed her brain. ♪♪♪